---
title: 'Oppenheimer'
date: '2023-12-01'
readTime: '3 min read'
summary: 'My thoughts on the 2023 Grammy-winning blockbuster "Oppenheimer".'
---

I watched the blockbuster Oppenheimer today, and much like the description of everyone else, it is surely another one of Christopher Nolan's masterpieces. The scenes in the movie are divided into two different parts, representing different timelines and perspectives — the first is one with colored scenes, titled "Fission" and the other is filmed entirely in black-and-white, titled "Fusion".

Of course, the titles given to these two timelines are highly relevant to the physics-dense nature of the film, but Christopher Nolan also explains to fans that "Fission" is the happenings of the movie based on the subjective experience of J. Robert Oppenheimer, while "Fusion" is a rather objective perspective of Lewis Strauss, a government official hellbent on tarnishing Oppenheimer's reputation following the tragic happenings of World War II. An enlightening perspective, offered by the YouTube channel New Rockstars, on the black-and-white scenes, was that they were a representation of Strauss' rigid, black-and-white view of the world, and his somewhat egotistical and narcissistic personality. 

Strauss was hungry for fame, seen by his desire for proceeding with the hydrogen bomb, a bomb far more powerful than the atomic bombs that had taken the lives of hundreds of thousands in Hiroshima and Nagasaki. He wanted to be the next Oppenheimer or "father of the bomb", so to speak. And of course after the devastating bombings, Oppenheimer, filled with guilt, strongly opposed Strauss in the creation of such a bomb. A few series of events such as the overpowering of Strauss by Oppenheimer and fellow scientists for the transport of radioisotopes, as well as a court hearing which saw Oppenheimer completely humiliate Strauss on safety matters regarding isotope export fuelled Strauss' personal vendetta against Oppenheimer. 

Strauss was driven to conduct corrupt, private hearings which tried to convict Oppenheimer of being a Soviet spy during the Manhattan Project, and revoke his security clearance. Fortunately, these accusations did not bear fruit. Strauss was exposed by David Hill, a scientist working with Szilard and Oppenheimer on the Manhattan Project. 

In my opinion, this movie serves to show that innovation is not just about churning out the most sophisticated, world-changing, beneficial (potentially) piece of technology. When something is world-changing, there will always be a price to pay. And this is where the humanities comes in. And the politics. I draw parallels from this to the concept of "alienation" explored by Dr. Jordan B. Peterson in one of his Maps of Meaning lectures. Humans are often alienated from their creations. When we invent something, we think we fully understand it. But it is not always the case. There are snakes everywhere, and the more complex something is, the more ubiquitous the snakes are.

This concept depicted in the film brings me back to think about the future of Artificial Intelligence. While engrossed in the film, I couldn't help but draw parallels between the depicted scenes and the contemporary discussions and apprehensions surrounding AI. The notion that a superintelligence or advanced artificial general intelligence (AGI) might already exist captivates me. Much like the unfolding events in Oppenheimer's story, such powerful entities could conceivably be discovered but held under tight wraps, shrouded in secrecy and earmarked for potential use as formidable weapons of mass destruction. The intriguing prospect of being privy to such classified information often crosses my mind — wondering if it would indeed be as exhilarating as it seems, or if the weight of such knowledge carries its own burdens.